# Prologue #

## How to use this book

There is not a correct -or incorrect, if we're getting there- way of reading this book. It all comes down to your interests.

To begin with, it's structured in four main parts that may be read separately:

The first introduces the basic concepts of TDD, as well as some strategies to learn to use and introduce this discipline in your practice.

In the second, a selection of kata or code exercises are introduce, with which the Test Driven Development concepts and techniques are explained in depth in their classic definition. They range from some that are very well known, to some that are self-made. 

Each of the kata is organized as follows:

* A theoretical chapter dedicated to a relevant aspect of TDD, highlighted by that kata, over which I have put special emphasis while solving it.
* An introduction to the kata, its origin if it's unknown, its problem statement, and a series of recommendations and points of interest about it.
* A solution developed in a different programming language and explained in detail. There's a repository with solutions to the kata in various languages.

The third part introduces the *outside-in* TDD methodology. *Outside-in* TDD is an approach that seeks to boost the design phase, and can be applied to real project development.

The fourth part is oriented to showcasing an example of a realistic project and how can TDD be incorporated in the various stages of development and maintenance, from the creation of a minimum viable product (MVP) to defect resolution and new feature incorporation.

If your looking for a manual to learn TDD from scratch, my advice would be to read it in order. The code exercises are laid out in order to introduce the concepts in a specific progression, one that I have reached through personal experience and when I've taught other people to use TDD.

In the beginning, you might think that the TDD exercises are too trivial and little realistic. Keep in mind that the name *kata* is not coincidental. A Kata, in martial arts, is a repetitive exercise that is practiced until its movements are automated and beyond. If you practice any sport you'll have done dozens of exercises aimed at increasing your flexibility, strength, mobility and automations, without them having a direct application to that sport. TDD kata have that same function: they prepare your brain to automate certain routines, generate specific habits, and be able to detect particular patterns in the development process.

Possibly, the *outside-in* approach looks that much more applicable to your daily work to you. In fact, it's a way of developing projects using TDD. However, a solid base in classic TDD is fundamental to be successful using it. *Outside-in* is very close to *Behavior Driven Development*.

As it has been mentioned before, the various parts and exercises are relatively independent. If you already have some experience with the Test Driven Development discipline, you can jump directly to the sections or exercises that you're interested in. Oftentimes you'll discover something new. One of the things I've found out is that even though you have practiced the same exercise dozens of times, new ideas always manage to come out.

If you're looking to introduce TDD in your or in your team's workflow, it's possible that you skip directly to the part about *TDD in real life*. It's the one that has, to put it that way, the most dependency on previous knowledge and experience. In that case, if you think you are laking fluency in TDD, it's possible that you must first take a look at other parts of the book.

To reach a good level of TDD performance you should practice the exercise many times. I'm not talking three or four, I'm talking dozens of times, in different parts of your professional life and, ideally, in different languages. There exists several kata repositories in which to find exercises, and you can also invent or discover your own.

It's also advisable to look at how other people do these exercises. In the web there are available lots of kata examples done in a variety of programming languages, and it's a great way of comparing your solutions and process.

And last but not least, one of the best ways to learn is practicing with other people. Be it in work projects, trainings, or practice communities. Live discussion of the solutions, the size of the steps, the behavior to test... will contribute to the honing and strengthening of your development process.

### Assumptions

For this book some assumptions are made:

* That you have a certain experience with any programming language and with a testing environment for that language. In other words: you know how to write and run tests. It doesn't matter that your favorite language isn't contemplated in this book.
* This book's examples are written in various languages, and as far as possible the usage of language-specific qualities is avoided. In fact, I am inexperienced in many of them, and therefore the code may appear very simple. On the other hand, this is something desirable in TDD, as you'll see throughout the book.
* It's clear to you that the objetive of the code exercise is not so much solving the problem as its proposed, which is eventually solved, but the path through which we arrive at that solution.
* You understand that there isn't neither a unique solution nor a precise path in the resolution of the kata. If your solution doesn't perfectly math the one showcased in this book, it's not a problem.

## Disclaimer

The proposed solutions to the kata are provided as explained examples of the reasoning processes that might be followed. They are not ideal solutions. When you do your version you could follow a completely different process that could be as valid (or even more) than the one presented here.

On the other hand, successive executions of the same kata by the same person could lead them to different solutions and paths. That is one of its benefits: by getting used to and automating certain thinking patterns, we can focus on more details each time and find new and more interesting points of intervention.

Likewise, as our fluency in a programming language increases, the implementations we achieve can be better and more elegant.

While preparing the kata presented in this book I have worked through several versions, in different languages, in order to find the most interesting routes and even purposefully causing some problems that I was interested in highlighting. The solution that I've finally decided to publish, in each case, is oriented towards some point that I wanted to accentuate about the TDD process, so it may not always be the optimal one.

That is to say, in a way, the kata come with a catch: they're about forcing things up to the point they best achieve a didactical objetive.

In another order of thing, I have taken advantage of this project to force myself to experiment with different programming languages. In some cases, there are new to me or I have very little experience working with them, so it's possible that the implementations are specially rough or don't include some of there more specific and optimal features.
