# Basic concepts

Next we'll define some of the concepts that are used throughout the book. They must be understood within the context of Test Driven Development.

## Test

A test is a small piece of software, usually a function, which runs another piece of code and verifies if it produces an expected result or effect. A test is, basically, an example of usage of the unit under test in which a scenario is defined and the tested unit is executed to see if the results matches what we had in mind.

Many languages use the notion of TestCase, a class that groups several related tests together. In this approach, each method is a test, although it's usual to refer to the test case as just "test".

### Test as specification

A test as specification utilizes usage examples from the tested piece of software in order to describe how it should work. Significant examples are used, above all, but it's not always done in a formal way.

It's opposite to the test as verification, typical of QA, in which the piece of software is tested by choosing the test cases in a systematic manner to verify that it fulfills what's expected of it.

### Failing test
 
A failing test is a specification that cannot be fulfilled yet because the production code that lets it pass hasn't been added. Testing *frameworks* typically represent them with a red color.

### Passing test

A passing test is a specification that runs production code which generates an expected result or response. Testing *frameworks* typically represent them with a green color.

## Types of tests

### Unit tests

They are tests that test an isolated unit of software; their dependencies are doubled to keep their influence on the result controlled.

### Integration tests

Integration tests usually test groups of software units, so that we can verify their communication and combined action.

### Acceptance tests

Acceptance tests are integration tests that test a software systems as if they were yet another of their consumers. We normally write them depending on the business's interests.

## Test Case

It's a class that groups several tests together.

## Test Suite

It's a set of test and/or test cases that can usually be executed together.

## Production code

In TDD we use the name "production code" to refer to the code that we write to make tests pass and which, eventually, will end up being executed in a production system.

## Software unit

Software unit is a quite flexible concept that we have to interpret within a context, but it usually refers to a piece of software that can be executed in a unitary and isolated manner, even if when it's composed of many elements.

## Subject under test

The software unit that is exercised in a test. There's a discussion about what is the scope of a unit. At one extreme there are those who consider that a unit is a function, a method, or even a class. However, we can also consider as unit under test a set of functions or classes that are tested through the public interface of one of them.

## Refactoring

A refactoring is a change in code that doesn't alter its behavior or its interface. The best way to ensure this is having at least one test that exercises the fragment of code that is being modified, so that after each change we make sure that the test keeps passing. This proves that the behavior hasn't changes even though the implementation has been modified.

Some techniques or refactoring patterns are described in compilations such as these, from[Refactoring Guru](https://refactoring.guru/refactoring/catalog), or the classic book from [Martin Fowler](https://martinfowler.com/books/refactoring.html).

### Automatic refactoring

Precisely because some refactorings are very well identified and characterized, it's been possible to develop tools that can execute them automatically. These tools are available in the IDE.
