# Coding-dojo y katas

## Kata

In the software world we call *kata* to design and programming exercises that pose relatively simple and limited problems that we can use to practice development methodologies.

This term is a borrowing from the Japanese word that refers to the training exercises typical of martial arts. Its introduction is attributed to Dave Thomas ([The Pragmatic Programmer](https://pragprog.com/titles/tpp20/the-pragmatic-programmer-20th-anniversary-edition/))[^fn9], referring to the completion of small code exercises, repeated over and over again until achieving a high degree of fluency or automation.

Applied to TDD, kata seek to train the test-production-refactoring as well as the ability to add behavior by means of small code increments. These exercises will help you divide a functionality in small parts, choose examples, advance in the project step by step, switch priorities depending on the information provided by the tests, etc.

The idea is to repeat the same kata many times. On top of gaining fluency in the application the process, in each of the repetitions there's the possibility of discovering new strategies. With repeated practice, we'll favor the development of certain habits and pattern recognition, automating our development process to a certain extent.

You can train with kata by yourself or with others. A systematic way of doing this is through a *Coding Dojo*.

## Coding-dojo

A *coding-dojo* is a workshop in which a group of people, regardless of their level of knowledge, perform a kata in a collaborative and non-competitive way.

The idea of *Coding Dojo* or *Coder's Dojo* was introduced in the XP2005 conference by Laurent Bossavit y Emmanuel Gaillot.

The basic structure of a coding-dojo is pretty simple:

* Presentation of the problem, explanation of the exercise (5-10 min)
* Coding session (30-40 min)
* Sharing of the status of the exercise (5-10 min)
* The coding session continues (30-40 min)
* Sharing and review of the achieved solutions

The coding session can be structured in several ways:

* **Prepared kata.** A presenter explains how to solve the exercise, but relying on the feedback from the attendants. No progress is made until consensus is reached. It's a very suitable way of working when the group is just starting out and few people are familiar with the methodology.
* **Randori kata.** The kata is done in paring using some system to switch between a driver (on the keyboard) and a co-pilot. The rest of the attendants collaborate by making suggestions.
* **Hands-on workshop.** One alternative is to make the participants form pairs and work on the kata collaboratively. Halfway through the exercise, a few-minutes break is taken in order to discuss the work that has been done. At the end of the session, all of the different solutions are presented (at whatever step of the assignment each team has arrived). Participants can choose their preferred programming language, so it's a great opportunity for those that are looking to get started with a new one. It can also be a good approach for beginners if the pair members have different levels of experience.

## Advice for completing the kata individually

In the beginning it may be a good idea to attend directed kata. Essentially, it's a kata performed by an expert in the shape of a *live coding* session where they explain or comment the different steps with the audience, in such a way that you can easily see the dynamic in action. If you don't have this possibility, which may be the most common scenario, it's a good idea to watch some kata on video. You will find some links in the chapters dedicated to each kata.

Above all, the goal of the kata is to exercise the TDD discipline, the application of the three laws, and the red-green-refactor cycle. Production code is actually less important, in the sense that it's not the main objective of the learning, although it will always be correct as long as the tests pass. However, every execution of the kata can lead us to discover new details and new ways of facing each phase.

Namely, the kata are designed to learn to develop software using tests as a guide, and to train the *mindset*, the reasonings, and the analysis that help us perform this task. In general, developing a good TDD methodology will help us write better software thanks to the constraints it imposes.

Obviously, the first tries will take their time, you will get into paths with no apparent return, or you will straight up skip some of the steps of the cycle. When this happens, you just have to go back or start over from scratch. These are exercise that don't have a unique correct answer.

In fact, every programming language, approach, or test environment could favor some solutions over the others. You can perform a kata several times, trying to assume different starting assumptions in each try, or applying different paradigms or conditions.

If you reach points in which you can choose between different courses of actions, take note of them in order to repeat the exercise, and try a different path later to see where it leads you.

In TDD it's really important to focus on **the here and the now** that each failing tests defines, and not get anxious about reaching the final objective. This doesn't mean putting it aside or dedicating ourselves to something else. It simply means that we have to tread that path step by step, and doing it like that will take us to the finish line almost without us realizing, with much less effort and more solidity. Acquiring this mindset, dealing only with the problem in front of us, will help us reduce stress and think more clearly.

If possible, try repeating the same kata using different languages, even different testing *frameworks*. The two best known families are:
* **xSpec**, which are oriented to TDD and tend to favor testing by example, providing specific syntax and utilities. Their handicap is that they don't usually work well for QA.
* **xUnit**, which are the most generic testing *frameworks*, albeit more QA oriented. Nevertheless, they can be used in TDD without any problems.

## How to introduce TDD in development teams

Introducing the TDD methodology in development teams is a complex process. Above all, it's important to contribute to generating a culture that's open to innovation, to quality, and to learning. The greatest reluctance often comes from a fear of TDD slowing down the development, or that at first they cannot see direct applications to the daily problems.

I personally believe that using both formal and informal channels can be of interest. Here are some ideas.

* Establishing a weekly time, one or two hours, for a coding-dojo open to the whole team. Depending on the level of expertise, it could start with directed kata, hands-on type sessions, or the format that seems the most appropriate to us. Ideally, several people would be able to get them moving.
* Bringing on experienced people into the teams who could help us introduce TDD in pairing or mob-programming work sessions, guiding their coworkers.
* Organizing specific trainings, with external help if people with enough experience aren't available.
* Introducing (if there isn't one already) a technical blog in which to publish articles, exercises, and examples about the topic.

## Kata repositories

* [Katalyst](https://katalyst.codurance.com)[^fn10]
* [Kata-log](https://kata-log.rocks/index.html)[^fn11]
* [Coding dojo](http://codingdojo.org)[^fn12]
* [Codekata](http://codekata.com)[^fn13]
* [Agile kata](http://agilekatas.co.uk)[^fn14]

## References

* [The Programming Dojo](http://www.butunclebob.com/ArticleS.UncleBob.TheProgrammingDojo)[^fn15]
* [What is coding dojo](http://codingdojo.org/WhatIsCodingDojo/)[^fn16]
* [The Coder’s Dojo – A Different Way to Teach and Learn Programming - Abstract](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F11499053_54)[^fn17]

[^fn9]: https://pragprog.com/titles/tpp20/the-pragmatic-programmer-20th-anniversary-edition/
[^fn10]: https://katalyst.codurance.com
[^fn11]: https://kata-log.rocks/index.html
[^fn12]: http://codingdojo.org
[^fn13]: http://codekata.com
[^fn14]: http://agilekatas.co.uk
[^fn15]: http://www.butunclebob.com/ArticleS.UncleBob.TheProgrammingDojo)
[^fn16]: http://codingdojo.org/WhatIsCodingDojo/
[^fn17]: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F11499053_54